---
layout:     post
title:      Rachel Getting Married
date:       2018-09-10
categories: cinephilia
---

A couple of days ago, I had the blu-ray of *Rachel Getting Married* on while
cooking dinner. It kept me company, and, even though I know it pretty well by
now, it often took me away from the kitchen just to enjoy a particular sequence
one more time. The next day, I went back to [Willow Maclay's
piece](https://thefilmstage.com/features/rachel-getting-married-and-the-first-person-humanism-of-jonathan-demme/)
for The Film Stage and [The Cinephiliacs' episode on Jonathan
Demme](http://www.thecinephiliacs.net/2017/05/this-american-life-remembering-jonathan.html)
to revisit the thoughts of my favourite film critics on my favourite Demme’s.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2018-09-10-rachel_getting_married.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>Rachel Getting Married (Jonathan Demme, 2008)</em>
</p>

For a film-maker as prolific and accustomed to different genres as Jonathan
Demme, *Rachel Getting Married* still stands out as one of a kind in his oeuvre.
Demme is not new to family drama and traumatic events in one’s life (e.g.,
Clarisse Starling’s past in *The Silence of the Lambs*), or to strong but
vulnerable women (e.g., Lulu in *Something Wild*). He explored his characters
minds and the ways we can relate and cope with them by let them facing the
camera and opened up to us. Willow Maclay writes about Demme’s humanism in the
above mentioned essay, and that is a trait of his cinema that spans over his
entire career.

However, in *Rachel Getting Married* Demme reaches out for a new form of his
humanism. Aided by the outstanding cinematography of Declan Quinn and the
turbulent script of Jenny Lumet, Demme digs deeper than ever in the psyche of
his female lead. Kym, portrayed by the best Anne Hathaway to date, is the
subject of constant observation and judgement everywhere she goes. This is not
only a modern mirror of our privacy-deprived lives, but to a certain extent is
the peak of Demme’s psychological explorations of his characters.

The camera in *Rachel Getting Married* invades spaces, inquisitively moves in
and out of rooms and buildings, capturing and exposing actions and thoughts. It
asks, even demands, attention from everyone. Secrecy is nowhere to be found,
because the camera is a fierce and poignant extension of the spectator. It is as
if we are rushing in with no desire of missing anything, while perfectly at ease
with the fact that we will surely lose something on our way.

Demme holds us closer to the lives on the screen like he has never done before.
Here conversations, confessions and reactions are not displayed in terms of an
actress seemingly talking to us. They literally happen around us, just a turn of
the head away. And there is always something going on at the periphery of our
eyes and ears in *Rachel Getting Married*. Everywhere in the Buchman’s house
people are getting ready for the wedding and playing music, talking and
laughing. According to the Q&A in the blu-ray, sometimes they don’t even know
the camera is there. This adds a level of uncompromising truth to the general
video-diary vibe that makes it possibly more personal and familiar than it
already feels.

The resulting experience becomes especially hurtful when we recognize
Kym’s desperate attempts to gain back the love of his family, and realize that
we can do nothing. No matter how close to her we are put, we can never give her
the much needed comfort. On the other hand, it’s an experience that enhances
those precious moments of joy which rarely appear but prove fundamental at
keeping everybody together. Including us.

Like in any other Jonathan Demme’s film, music is itself a character in the
story. Various cultures meet in a clash of races and genders, culminating in a
showcase of music and dance that encompasses different styles. This is not a
tentative approach at portraying folklore and heritage with a humanist touch,
since there is a documentarian side of Demme that deals with it.

In *Rachel Getting Married* he lets the musicians speak for themselves, leaving
them in front of the camera apparently in full control of their playing. Their
emotions are honestly genuine, and every musical burst looks as natural as
anything else in this film. Demme loves his music just as much as he loves
engaging with issues of reconciliation and forgiveness. He has always used great
music in his films, but the mere fact that musicians in *Rachel Getting Married*
are caught in the act of playing live is telling of his respect and appreciation
for them.

I like to imagine him with a camera still following the lives of the people he
cares about, with music always in the air and that contagious smile of his.
Somewhere, somehow, he is telling a story I wish I could see.

