---
layout:     post
title:      Hu Bo and the country that sits still
date:       2018-10-31
categories: cinephilia
---

Cinema is a mixed bag of aesthetics, a complex blend of visual art, technology,
sound design, and theatre. It encourages an infinite set of ideas and ideals,
whether hidden or in plain sight. It doesn’t matter if there is a powerful
company or an independent artist behind a film. Moral and ethic values,
political dynamics and concerns are all always at play.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2018-10-31-an_elephant_sitting_still_still.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>An Elephant Sitting Still (Hu Bo, 2018)</em>
</p>

Like every other film industry in the world, China’s invests tons of money in
blockbusters which more often than not resembles tests of the latest discovery
in special effects. Just as Hollywood has been capitalising on comic book heroes
in the last years, China has found *wuxia* to be a lucrative genre. Exceptional
authors like Tsui Hark and Stephen Chow have been deliberately limiting
themselves, constraining their art into predetermined boundaries. Chow is now
one of the most powerful man in China’s film establishment, so maybe everything
is going fine for him.

However, China, again like the rest of the world, has its fair share of
independent directors who have been telling a different story since the late
90s. Jia Zhangke, Diao Yinan, and more recently Wang Bing are names that score
big at film festivals, but they are a nuisance to their country’s film realm.
They show the uncomfortable faces of China, the cities, the streets, and the
outcasts nobody wants to see. The failures the central government refuses to
acknowledge are as part of China’s history as everything else. Somebody must
tell of these failures. Someone has to care.

I can only guess Hu Bo felt as a nuisance for his country too, although
it’s hard to tell from a safe distance what has led him to end his life. The
short film *Man in the Well* and the outstanding *An Elephant Sitting Still*
undoubtedly place him in the group of artists China chooses to cast aside, but
they also show Hu Bo’s inner battles. Is there a place for me here? Will this
country ever move forward for everyone and not just for a few? What will it
cost? What am I supposed to do in China, here and now?

Intersecting four different stories, *An Elephant Sitting Still* poses these
questions without offering answers. They are left open because it takes too much
to reply, even though the chance of an answer eventually is an hopeful sound.
The two final static shots culminate with the sound the characters are waiting
for. Too little, because they don’t get to see what they are looking for. And
yet something to look forward to, like the flash of a light in a never-ending
tunnel.

Except that this is a light that doesn’t come easy. It takes almost four hours
to Hu Bo to bring his protagonists there. They have to endure a day in which
they are constantly confronted with the weight of their decisions. They are at
turns victims and oppressors, predators and preys, unable to truly escape a
system so far above them to be properly understood and dealt with. There is a
sense of impeding catastrophe every time we see them walking down a street, but
the war is in their heart more than anywhere else. They know what has to be done
only because there is nothing left to be done. Circumstances they cannot handle,
accidents out of proportion. Everything eludes their control.

The intimacy of the long takes is absolutely stunning. Not only we are
physically closer to these people, we are facing their reactions to the events
on the front line. With the exception of the two above mentioned ending shots,
the camera narrows everything down to a limited space. We can then sense the
claustrophobic buildings, the unstoppable decay, the solitude that never leaves
anyone in this world. Editing makes these sensations even stronger, since it
rarely concedes room to breathe. To digest what has just happened, we can only
wait until the next portion of the story starts.

Hu Bo shots everything smoothly, avoiding a shaking, hand-held camera and opting
for a gentle Steadicam instead. This solution eschews the diary and the
found-footage mood, whilst striking the perfect balance between the personal
take on the events (we see what Hu Bo wants us to see) and the objective truth
(no embellishment, this is exactly how it goes). Hu Bo is paying homage to the
masters of the Sixth Generation of Chinese Cinema and at the same time moving
away from them, following a path we will never know where it would have led him
to.

Ultimately, *An Elephant Sitting Still* represents what China is now.
A contradictory clash of realities, where the overbearing economy of the
capitalist side of communism is destroying everyone who isn’t able to keep up.
China cannot afford to sit still unless it’s ready to accept the lives of its
people. Hu Bo knew it much too well.
