---
layout:     post
title:      Second Sight Films’ Breathless
date:       2018-03-29
categories: blu-ray
---

Last time I wrote about appreciation on a personal level. Although a similar
reasoning could be applied to Jim McBride’s *Breathless*, it’s a well-known fact
that Quentin Tarantino blessed this film in the pantheon of cult cinema.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2018-03-29-breathless.png">
    <br>
    <em>Breathless (Jim McBride, 1983)</em>
</p>

However, despite not being alone in my devotion to McBride’s most accomplished
work, Tarantino stamp of approval has nothing to do neither with my first
viewing of *Breathless*, nor with the insane love I experienced.

The truth is: it’s all Giona Nazzaro’s fault. Among the precursors of Hong Kong
cinema studies in Italy, Nazzaro collected his thoughts on the evolution of
Hollywood action cinema in *Action! Forme di un transgenere cinematografico*.
That book led me to *Breathless*, which in turn made me reconsider Richard Gere
and gain a better understanding of *American Gigolo*. And I still believe
Richard Gere has never been *this* good in his entire career.

The only blu-ray available before [Second Sight
Films](http://www.secondsightfilms.co.uk/) came into play was the region A one
from Shout! Factory, so I was in dire need of a proper European release.
*Breathless* is full of vivid and powerful colours, and it pumps images as
energetic as the marvellous soundtrack. It practically begs for high-resolution
and deafening loudness.

Second Sight Films revamped the blu-ray artwork with a cover that gets
*Breathless* essence more than any words I could use. It puts Jesse at the
centre, because he *is* the film: narcissistic, cocky, naive, *loco*. The colour
palette is also a perfect choice, since it naturally conveys the *hotness* of
the rock’n’roll adventure ready to unfold before our eyes.

The disc contains a couple of special features: a nearly 30-minutes chat with
Mark Kermode, and an interview with Valérie Kaprisky.

Kermode is awesome. He first saw the film when it came out in 1983, so he was
there in the beginning, debating the ups and downs of McBride’s work while
avoiding insults from the gang of “film snobs” (his words). It’s a conversation
worth checking out, and I am clearly ready to stand by his side, sword in my
hand, defending *Breathless* until the very end.

The interview with Kaprisky adds a good nostalgic touch, and some insights on
the film from the too often criticized actress. Not an absolute must, but still
something funny to complete my *Breathless* experience.

Granted, a making-of and an interview with the director would have been
fantastic gifts. Nonetheless, Second Sight Films took what is usually regarded
as laughing stock, and packaged it in a much deserved, great format. I can
hardly be any happier.
