---
layout:     post
title:      The present is the past is the future
date:       2018-11-15
categories: cinephilia
---

Funny how volatile judgement is. I remember enjoying Ernest Cline’s *Ready
Player One* while reading it, and then time has almost entirely overturned my
appreciation for it. I was still dealing with the rise of my negative opinion
about Cline’s work the first time I saw Steven Spielberg’s adaptation this year,
hence no surprises my bias ruined my enjoyment. Upon watching *Ready Player One*
again last Sunday, a totally different film unfolded on the screen. I refused to
oblige the bias, and sat in ecstatic amusement while Spielberg built a world of
wonders in front of me.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2018-11-14-ready_player_one.jpg">
    <br/>
    <em>Ready Player One (Steven Spielberg, 2018)</em>
</p>

I instantly connected my feelings of joy to the ones I experienced when *Star
Wars* entered my life as a kid and set my love for cinema ablaze. This is not
coincidental, because *Ready Player One* is the closest Spielberg has ever come
to match the visionary of visuals that is George Lucas.

However, I had kind of forgot about George Lucas. When the prequels came out
I was one of those fans who felt betrayed and insulted. I went in looking for
something the prequels are not: the original trilogy. As a result, nostalgia
played the same role my opinion of Cline’s book played with *Ready Player One*.
After *Revenge of the Sith*, from time to time I revisited the original trilogy
for nostalgia’s sake, but my love for George Lucas was weakening, and even those
three films were losing my devotion year after year. Cinema changed, I changed,
and by now that galaxy was literally far, far away.

*Ready Player One* left me with the desire of revisiting George Lucas’ works.
I took the experience of the second viewing as a sign. The *Star Wars* prequels
needed another chance. If it happened with Spielberg, it could happen with Lucas
as well. It just felt like I owed it to him.

*The Phantom Menace* surprised me the most. The weakest chapter among the
prequels and the one that sparkled my delusion back then, *The Phantom Menace*
lays the grounds for all the politics to come. The pod race is as amazing as
I remembered, pure kinetic power at barely controllable speed. The Wachowksis
surely memorized this race before devising the absolute madness of *Speed
Racer*. On the other hand, Lucas is not ready to fully embrace the CGI like he
wishes, or maybe it’s the CGI not ready for him yet, because *The Phantom
Menace* doesn’t always look as beautiful as some of its best images. The fantasy
of its author is impeded by the technological limits of the time.

It’s only with *Attack of the Clones* that he finally gets what his heart
deserves. Lucas has now everything he needs to elaborate an imaginary universe,
and he understands what it takes to go beyond the mere creation of spaces for
the action to occur. He experiments with colour shifts, crafting backgrounds
that intensify the psychological warfare within Anakin. There is no manichean
distinction between light and shadow any more, a stylistic choice which reflects
the blurred distinction of good and evil typical of Eastern philosophies. The
most experimental episode of the saga in terms of formal achievements, *Attack
of the Clones* also starts posing the question further explored in *Revenge of
the Sith*: what does it mean to be a Jedi Knight? *Star Wars* has never explored
so deeply the moral ambiguity of its heroes.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2018-11-14-star_wars.jpg">
    <br/>
    <em>Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (George Lucas, 2005)</em>
</p>

Reinvigorated by the first two chapters, I approached *Revenge of the Sith* with
even more curiosity. Of the three, it’s the only one that the younger me ended
up moderately liking, but what would I think now that my perspective on *The
Phantom Menace* and *Attack of the Clones* has changed?

Lucas pulls you right into a furious battle in space. It’s already clear he is
now dominating the resources at his disposal. The CGI is slick, and he can now
stage impossible acrobatics, invention after invention, like he has always been
trying to do. This is the dream come true of a kid possessed by the spectacle of
images moving on a screen. Here Lucas is creating the defining epic war for its
saga, moments unparalleled in proportion and unique in technique. Amidst the
grandeur of the fights, the pivotal drama of *Star Wars* reaches its peak.
Anakin falls prey of the Dark Side, he sacrifices everything for the promise of
untamed power.

Moreover, Anakin eventually has to deal with the political dilemma built up so
far by *The Phantom Menace* and *Attack of the Clones*. He struggles to find
hope in democracy because it appears to be no democracy when everyone is above
you. He fails to comprehend the implications of a ruling government because he
wants immediate answers to his questions and immediate actions to benefit from.
All that matters has to be within his reach, everything else is simply marginal.
The fear of losing what he has is exploited by Darth Sidious and in the end
takes Anakin to the point of no return.

It’s the same fear Darth Sidious works with to obtain the position of leader of
the soon to be Empire. Fear is the actual phantom menace. It attacks and wins
over the minds of a great Master Jedi such as Yoda. He suspects but can’t act,
he waits and can’t see, stopped by a feeling greater than his belief in the
Force. His exile is the supreme failure of the Jedi Knights. *Revenge of the
Sith* reveals itself as George Lucas most ambitious masterpiece.

The *Star Wars* prequels present a past the original trilogy struggles to
confront with. The scale of the universe designed by George Lucas here is indeed
too much for the possibilities cinema offered in the late seventies and
throughout the eighties. When they came out, the prequels had fans lacking the
sane distance needed for an appreciation devoid of misconceptions. Now may be
the right time to revisit *The Phantom Menace*, *Attack of the Clones*, and
*Revenge of the Sith*, and at last understand the mighty vision of George Lucas.
