---
layout:     post
title:      Rollerland
date:       2018-09-20
categories: cinephilia
---

Much as any cinephile out there, I have my ugly share of preconceptions. I try
to hide them most of the times, but describing my approach to cinema as
immaculate would be flat-out lying. For instance, it takes a good number of
trustworthy reviews to get me to watch a Sundance Film Festival winner. Possibly
worse in this day and age, it’s nearly impossible to convince me to sit and
enjoy the latest hyped TV series.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2018-09-20-rollerland.png">
</p>

A similar bias has kept me away from Drew Barrymore’s *Whip It* for a long time.
Without even giving Barrymore a chance, I skipped her directorial debut in 2009
with a smug glow of irony on my face, and forgot about it until recently. Not
being a particular fan of Barrymore’s acting career, I thought *Whip It* would
be a far less than spectacular work. Gladly, it turns out I’d better overcome my
stupid ideas soon, and let cinema speak for itself.

*Whip It* is the story of the hopes and chances of Bliss Cavendar, a teenage
girl feeling out of place and out of time. Since I know the feeling very well,
this is immediately relatable, so it’s easy for *Whip It* to pull me in and
never let me go. I chose cinema and computing to deal with reality in my younger
days, but since Bliss is braver and smarter than me, she opts for sport and
teamwork instead.

I can relate to Bliss just by looking at her marvelling when she first sees some
girls skate-rolling their way to a shop counter. Barrymore captures on Ellen
Page the exact feeling of wonder that conquered me when I coded simple
animations in Turbo Pascal back in secondary school. Right there with you,
Bliss.

This is where *Whip It* really shines. Not in the conventional, albeit lovable
plot. Not in the furious matches, although the way Barrymore handles the tension
and especially the failures is really captivating. *Whip It* does its best
pretty much in the same field Greg Mottola’s *Adventureland*, the other great
coming of age of 2009, does. Both films, in wonderfully different ways, explore
what it means to become adult and independent. By means of sport passion and
romance respectively, Barrymore and Mottola use a light dose of humour to place
the heavy burden of adulthood on their protagonists’ shoulders.

Mottola’s James Brennan is too young to be adult, and too adult to be young.
Socially inept, James finds a role model in Mike Connell, the park maintenance
man that everyone loves. He looks up to him, opens up to him, and keep admiring
him even after the pretty mask starts showing its cracks. The failure of
Connell’s macho act is vital to James’ experience. He is now confronted with one
of the many bad faces of a grown-up, and eventually he resorts to be as
different as possible from it. Mottola works the virile bonding between James
and Connell with subtlety, infusing tenderness to the very end. The last time
James looks at Connell flirting with a bunch of girls, his eyes reveal
everything we need to know about his opinion of his role model. James knows who
he will not want to be, now.

Bliss has her own role models too, but she is apparently the only one regarding
them with admiration. It’s interesting to notice that the Hurl Scouts act tough
to hide something in their life, much as Connell does in *Adventureland*. Also,
the Hurl Scouts are misfits, and they become popular only on the roller derby
track, something similar to Connell’s popularity within the boundaries of the
park. Both the Hurl Scouts and Connell are older than our protagonists, but not
as older as their parents. This is crucial, because the Hurl Scouts and Connell
represent an ageing step closer to Bliss’ and James’ age, which means they can
see what life is going to hand them in the next few years if they follow their
models much too close.

Whereas the relation between James and Connell always shows an intangible
distance, Bliss fits naturally among the skate-rollers. This probably tells more
about teamwork than of the strengths of Bliss’ and James’ social skills, but
there is an alpha male component in James and Connell which plagues their way to
Emily Lewin’s heart and keeps them hopelessly apart. The Hurl Scouts share a
passion that can be as brutal and painful physically as love hurts
psychologically, and yet agonistic competition never poses a threat to their
friendship. Another valuable life lesson here: leave the pedestal if you want
honesty from the people around you.

In the end, Bliss convinces her parents of the sincerity of her passion, and
James finds his way to Emily. These happy endings conclude two incredibly
formative experiences, and more importantly take some of our characters’
innocent youth away from them. They are not adult yet, but they had a glimpse of
what it means to be one.
