---
layout:     post
title:      Retelling is not for everyone
date:       2019-02-06
categories: cinephilia
---

*Bohemian Rhapsody* reminded me of how difficult it is to tell a story more or
less well-known. Questions of accuracy, respect and fan-service are inevitable,
as inevitable is the pressure behind a work that must deal with a popular
figure. *Bohemian Rhapsody* follows the conventional biopic path, unfolding
mechanically like a Wikipedia entry. It limits itself to bits and pieces of a
subject too complex to be tamed, and it fails miserably at showing us that there
is more to Queen than a greatest hits collection.

<!--more-->

Nonetheless, biopics has always fascinated me, especially since I am an avid
reader of biographies and autobiographies. I enjoyed *Control* and *Love &
Mercy*, and I loved *Bird* and *I’m Not There*. None of these has had the
overwhelming power of *Ivan the Terrible* on me, but that’s because Sergei
Eisenstein was not from this planet, and I am pretty sure he would have slapped
me if he had heard me call his unfinished masterpiece a *biopic*.

The last biopic capable of shook me up in a manner similar to Eisenstein’s was
Michael Mann’s *Ali*. What takes *Ali* closer to *Ivan the Terrible* than to the
other above-mentioned films is where the focus is.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2019-02-05-ali.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>Ali (Michael Mann, 2001)</em>
</p>

Most of the time, biopics take few liberties. In the worst cases, they tend to
resemble documentaries. Too close to the source material, too constrained in
their view, they add little to nothing to the formulaic one-man show. It’s a
pattern so obvious it has been mocked many times (e.g., *Walk Hard*).

*Ali* defies this schema right from the start. In ten minutes of brilliant
montage, with juxtapositions of music, boxing training, and episodes of the
champion’s life, Mann avoids the *“once upon a time…”* cliché, contextualises
his character, and then jumps straight into Ali’s turning point: the glorious
fight with Sonny Liston. The fact that the film opens without a single word from
Ali, a man as powerful with his voice and words as he was with his fists, feels
like Mann immediately stating his position against the biopic genre.

But there is more on this beginning. Of all the books on Muhammad Ali, Michael
Mann singled out *Redemption Song: Muhammad Ali and the Spirit of the Sixties*
by Mike Marqusee as the best in a [conversation with Bilge
Ebiri](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1QtAbxh7shw "An Evening With Michael
Mann"). Not so surprisingly, the book begins with the same Clay-Liston fight
*Ali* does. I don’t think this is a geeky touch. On the contrary, I feel like
Mann connected on more than one level with Marqusee’s pages, and decided to
portray a complex figure without losing sight of the significance of the events
that surrounded it. And that is why *Ali* deals with only ten years of Muhammand
Ali’s life. With the cultural and historical era at the centre of the picture,
we have a deeper sense of the nature of Muhammad Ali’s choices in the most
important timespan of his life.

Mann never steps back from the possibilities in front of him. The afro-camera,
as it is ironically referred to in the *Making Of*, is as simple as it is
ingenious: placed on the head of the fighter, it puts the viewer in between the
punches, augmenting our sense of participation in the drama called boxing. The
trick is not to abuse of such a device, and Mann knows when to stop. And the
same goes with the political implications: Mann hints, without confirming it nor
denying it, at the FBI plot behind Malcolm X murder. It’s enough. It’s up to us,
now. If only Freddie Mercury sexuality could have been treated with this
cleverness.

This is the kind of personal involvement most biopics lack. *Ali* could not have
been done by someone other than Michael Mann. His vision, his composition, his
realism, his hero, his moments of tenderness. It’s all here. Never for a second
you feel like these images come from a book, or like there is a documentary that
tells it the same way but in a different style.

And then comes Will Smith. I won’t question Rami Malek preparation for the role
of Freddie Mercury, although those ridiculous fake teeth still keep me up at
night sometimes. I know Freddie Mercury’s voice is unique, but he was a unique
persona too. Much like Muhammad Ali, which is why Will Smith’s performance is
something Malek’s should have studied closely. True, Smith had the chance to
have Muhammad Ali on the set, but instead of arbitrarily hiding sides of his
vibrant personality, Smith and Mann bring everything out in subtle ways. His
braggadocio, the complete transformation from Cassius Clay into Muhammad Ali,
his religious belief, his humour and his charm, his adultery. By the tonal
shifts in the voice and the studied movements (the walk, the eyes), all the
controversial traits of Ali emerge without compromising the nature of the film.
At his best, Malek mimics Mercury’s flamboyant stage presence and mercurial
temperament, but it stops there. There is one idea of Freddie Mercury in
*Bohemian Rhapsody*, and that’s all we get.

While *Bohemian Rhapsody* adds nothing to a trite custom, *Ali* redefines the
biopic and it offers itself as one of the few, real alternatives to a way too
much standardised approach to biographical material.
