---
layout:     post
title:      Visualising music
date:       2019-04-25
categories: cinephilia
---

A work of art reveals an artist ego just as much as it uncovers her persona.
Since *4* in 2011, there is more of Beyoncé’s ego and persona in every song she
creates. Free from the ties with the father-manager Mathew Knowles, she looked
inward for intimacy and outward for influences. She found a mature voice, but
she also brought out traits of her identity that stardom can easily garble.

<!--more-->

With *Beyoncé* two years later, she continued down the intimacy path exploring
darker corners and another set of musical references. The secrecy surrounding
the recording sessions was a self-imposed compartmentalization to explore sides
of herself her public persona had obscured by then. She was not the first artist
seeking privacy, but considering the degree of exposure fame imposes on a star
this big, it felt like the natural approach to developing creative freedom.
*Beyoncé* is also the album where she began building and expanding on the themes
of her music by way of visuals. As compelling as they were, they still feel like
try-outs compared to 2016’s *Lemonade*.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2019-04-25-homecoming.png">
</p>

Musically, *Lemonade* is Beyoncé at her most eclectic to date. The span of
styles is greater than ever before, but everything fits together so nicely you
would think of a concept album even if nobody told you that it was thought as
one. As if not happy with an already outstanding effort—a whole record instead
of a collection of Spotify-ready tunes, are you serious!?— Beyoncé pushes the
music video experience to the next step of its evolution.

A music video is a strange object. In my MTV-fuelled teenage days, I remember
skimming through music video channels numbly, partially aware of the music,
partially aware of the visuals. It would be hard now to remember the ones that
really left a mark on me, and little I understood back then of the marketing
effect of these products and the difference between self-promotion and the art
in it.

The visuals for *Lemonade* are more than beautifully produced video-companions
of singled-out tracks. It’s a complete film, a stand-alone experience in which
Beyoncé uses the poetry and prose of Warsan Shire to articulate eleven chapters
of her own history. She pays homage to folklore, traditions, and black power,
while leveraging blackness and femininity. At the same time, she is displaying
respect for what came before her and what is out there right now, transforming
the cracks in her marriage into starting points for several possible stories,
the whole greater than the single parts. No other popular music artist has ever
reached this far in terms of understanding the film medium and working with it
instead of letting it work for you. It’s both the end of the music video era as
we knew it and the last nail on the rock’n’roll coffin.

However, Beyoncé is not done with writing history. Enthusiasm about her
revolutionary performance at last year’s Coachella was still flying high on the
Web when *Homecoming* landed on Netflix on April 17. The next day lists of the
greatest concert films of all time were being updated to include it, and rightly
so.

A concert film is a strange object. In my music-charged teenage days, I used to
buy live concert DVDs. Some of them are still here, and I’d pick Björk’s *Live
at Royal Opera House* if you asked me to show you the one I watched the most.
Then came *Stop Making Sense* and *Sign o’ the Times*, and I eventually came to
understand the difference between a recorded performance and the art of
producing it.

*Homecoming* is a concert film like nothing before it. It lacks the visceral
precision of *Stop Making Sense* and the controlled grandeur of *Sign o’ the
Times*, but this doesn’t mean Beyoncé is carefree and amateurish. *Homecoming*,
which she wrote, directed, and executive produced, is all about control, albeit
not the technical control of Jonathan Demme or the creative control of Prince.
Beyoncé is controlling the narrative, and she is articulating her story once
again by putting a mirror in front of herself. The vanity of a pop star bathing
in the joy of her fans, the giants that shaped her body of work, the personal
struggles and the achievements. She doesn’t shy away from anything, but she
obviously unveils only what she considers valuable to the understanding of her
project. *Homecoming* is about birth, but it’s about rebirth too. Much in the
same way she explored a black woman’s identity in *Lemonade*, here she is
questioning the opportunities and the outcomes laid out in front of the same
black woman. Where is she from? How did she arrive here? More importantly, where
is she now?

This is where *Homecoming* offers itself as the missing piece of the concert
films realm. Beyoncé doesn’t need to reinvent marketing solutions to sell more
albums, nor has she to prove to anyone the strength of her live performances.
She could actually just sit and collect the money from the hits created in more
than twenty years. Instead, she’s still asking the same question that opened
*Crazy in Love*, the beginning of her solo career: “You ready?”.
