---
layout:     post
title:      Questioning the future
date:       2019-07-05
categories: cinephilia
---

A work of art is ever-changing. It never ceases to approach you in unexpected
ways and, even when you know what is coming, a work of art knows that it can
surprise your mental agility in an instant. It’s as living as the artist, and
just as the artist explores different directions, a work of art moves and
challenges you constantly. If it doesn’t move or it stops fighting, then there
is little art involved in it.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2019-07-05-ai.png">
    <br>
    <em>A.I. Artificial Intelligence (Steven Spielberg, 2001)</em>
</p>

A recent review of [A.I. Artificial
Intelligence](https://letterboxd.com/werckmeisters/film/ai-artificial-intelligence/2/)
by Alec Lane prompted me to reacquaint with a fundamental piece of my love for
cinema. Lane’s write-up is not only the best commentary on *A.I.* I’ve ever
read[^1], it also makes a convincing and beautifully thought point: there is
more Steven Spielberg than Stanley Kubrick at play here, and only Spielberg
could have taken the film to its incredible heights.

This is such a fascinating take for me, because I’ve always thought of *A.I.* as
a film from two minds. I superficially attributed the first and third act to
Kubrick, and the second, longish one to Spielberg. My error was the consequence
of the limited knowledge of Spielberg’s career I had until recent years.
I deemed him a somewhat too dully popular and happy-ending seeker, so my view on
his works had been impeded by such unjustified snobbery.

However, *A.I.* felt immediately special. After the first viewing, it became a
fixation. I devoured the special contents on the two-disc DVD edition, collected
articles and books about and at the basis of it, bought the Blu-ray, repeatedly
annoyed everyone around me over the years, and wrote about it on one of my
long-lost affairs with blogging[^2].

Why do I feel compelled to revisit *A.I.* so much? It has to do with its nature.
The more I grow old, the more I read and learn. The more I know, the more I find
in the film. Surely this is a process applicable to many other films as well,
but it’s particularly gratifying with *A.I.* because there seems to be no end at
the angles from which it can be looked at. The fairy tale as an allegory is just
the first step. As soon as you start peeling layers away, *A.I.* offers
questions, more than answers, on pathos and ethos, immortality and spirituality,
hierarchies and preservation, race and manipulation, science and technocracy,
parenthood and childhood, the fallacy of memory and the poignancy of loss, the
future and our responsibility towards it. The questions come viewing after
viewing, the answers must be looked for elsewhere. The fact that a film can
provoke thoughts on life and time, while pushing me to dig further to understand
the topics it is covering, makes it instantly invaluable.

*A.I.* has changed over the years. At first it appeared to me as intelligent
entertainment, a smart blockbuster from a popular cinema mastermind often
misunderstood. Then it started raising philosophical issues, pointing its
fingers at the viewers and the world around them, while long due appreciation
for the craftsmanship eventually begun. Finally, it placed itself as a unique
piece of science fiction, unparalleled ever since and standing firm as one of
Spielberg’s most accomplished works—if not *the* most accomplished one.

I already explored the [unpredictability of
judgement](https://www.filmsinwords.eu/cinephilia/2018/11/15/lucas.html), but
there is more than a shift in opinions here. *A.I.* poses itself as a demanding
work of art. It can never be completely grasped, because we are never an
absolute. We face art at different points in time, just as art reflects the
times when it comes to life. But it’s only when art grows old and overcomes the
days immediately following its creation and reception that we are confronted
with something more intimate than an expression of beauty. Art brings us to
self-discovery and understanding, positioning itself as the necessary means to
make sense of what is to come.

#### Notes ####

[^1]: It outclasses Jonathan Rosenbaum’s famous *The Best of Both Worlds* too.

[^2]: Actually at the moment is [still
    available](https://web.archive.org/web/20120710035029/http://gwailoutavern.blogspot.com/2012/02/ai-di-steven-spielberg-2001.html)
    thanks to the Wayback Machine.
