---
layout:     post
title:      Once Upon a Time
date:       2019-12-02
categories: cinephilia
---

I remember the first time I saw *Pulp Fiction* quite well. I was a sixteen-year
old already settled on my path to becoming a proper nerd, which means I was your
regular outsider in a valley of farmers and carpenters, far from any big city,
and without a reliable internet connection. I relied on magazines to inform my
cinephilia, and at that time some of those came with a VHS attached. That is how
*Pulp Fiction* entered my life.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2019-12-02-once_upon_a_time_in_hollywood.png">
    <br>
    <em>Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (Quentin Tarantino, 2019)</em>
</p>

Fast forward fifteen years, and after *Inglourious Basterds* I lost interest in
Quentin Tarantino. I didn’t particularly like *Django Unchained* and though
I enjoyed *The Hateful Eight*, I’ve never gone back to it. The only one of his
works I was willing to revisit is *Death Proof*, because in there our love for
images met, danced, and kissed amiably.

This could partly explain why *Once Upon a Time in Hollywood* hit me so hard.
I simply wasn’t expecting a great film from Tarantino, and I certainly wasn’t
expecting him to be able to tell me something new. I’ve always had the feeling
he had little to say, albeit he had been saying it mostly convincingly, film
after film. The themes, the references, the dialogues, the violence, the
objectification of pop culture: his cinema has been a reiteration of his own
obsessions. An enjoyable endeavour if you go along with it, a trite exercise
when you don’t.

In *Once Upon a Time in Hollywood*, Tarantino has finally understood that geeky
quotes, fan-service, and homages can live within a much broader context. Instead
of amusing the audience and himself with pop references and obscure trivia, he
uses nostalgia as a platform to deliver punches at a world that is actually not
the dream we used to believe in. And so we have an ageing actor who is forced to
accept subpar roles, merely a pawn at the disposal of producers and directors
who just want to profit from his once glorious fame. Next to him a stuntman who,
in spite of his easygoing attitude, sees his future perilously attached to a
movie star’s highs and lows. All dark sides of an industry that swallows you in
as quickly as it can throw you out from the back.

However, Tarantino is too much in love with his idea of Hollywood to let go
nostalgia once and for all. *Once Upon a Time in Hollywood* brims with the
culture of the period, every set carefully devised to convey the feeling of a
long gone era. The joy of re-creation is evident: leaflets, signposts,
accessories, wallpapers, posters, everything mirrors an insane love for those
years. In his previous films, this would be a sign of attention to minute
details for the sake of it, a perversion for popular paraphernalia one has to
show off, but here Tarantino finds the grace of George Lucas’ *American
Graffiti*. The camera moves patiently from a billboard to a neon sign, caresses
a drive-in and indulges on a cocktail with lover’s eyes. The surroundings blend
in with the individual stories being told. Instead of keeping track of the pop
nods, the viewer can actually feel in another place and another time, and they
are forgiven when they miss the umpteenth clue.

Key to this smooth balance between time-travelling fun and functional
environments is what lies beneath the surface. Tarantino’s cinema is one of
individuals, men and women who more or less coincidentally cross paths which
usually end in violent confrontations. Here we have long stretches where nothing
relevant seems to happen. Just when one is about to ask whether there is a point
or not, one realizes the isolation the characters live in and how much of
everyone’s distinct isolations Tarantino intersect at precise points of the
story. The pleasure Sharon Tate finds in the people appreciating her performance
on the screen of a movie theatre is the pleasure Rick Dalton discovers in being
able to act greatly in a hackneyed western. The nonsensical world Cliff Booth
flashbacks into while on Dalton’s rooftop gives him the same happiness Sharon
Tate dwells in when home alone she listens to her favourite music. For a
director so in love with his dialogues, there are plenty of beautifully silent
moments in *Once Upon a Time in Hollywood*.

Moreover, this film marks the first time in almost thirty years Tarantino has
replaced irony and complacent jokes with self-irony. I remember vividly when, at
the peak of his popularity, he ended up on the covers of DVDs recommending the
latest Asian film director he put his eyes on. His words become religion among
film viewers, and I too started digging through B-movies shelves to discover the
hidden gem he had just mentioned in another interview. In *Once Upon a Time in
Hollywood* Taratino has eventually come to terms with this, lightly mocking the
pretentiousness of all but forgettable productions. He invests so much time in
making the less than memorable stints of Rick Dalton look real that one begin to
believe he actually thinks they are great stuff. Thanks to DiCaprio’s hilarious
overacting, though, the mimicry is exposed as brilliantly as it is achieved.

*Once Upon a Time in Hollywood* could very well be the surprise of the year for
me. I hope Quentin Tarantino moves further from here, and begins to apply the
lenses he used to analyse the world of the Hollywood that was to the Hollywood
that we have right now.
