---
layout:     post
title:      Arrivederci Soavi, Ciao
date:       2019-01-02
categories: cinephilia
---

It’s always been hard for me to cope with Italian cinema. I am not talking about
obvious masters such as Roberto Rossellini, Elio Petri, and Federico Fellini
here. I am talking about the most recent output of my country’s film world,
which makes me wonder what those masters would think of Italian cinema today.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2019-01-02-la_befana_vien_di_notte.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>La Befana Vien di Notte (Michele Soavi, 2018)</em>
</p>

Luckily enough, there are exceptions to my bias. Michele Soavi’s *Arrivederci
Amore, Ciao* is one of them, although it’s a work so criminally underrated it
feels like me being the contrarian again. No wonder, then, that last night I had
mild expectations for Soavi’s latest effort: *La Befana Vien di Notte*. The
trailer looked like fun, and I entered the theatre expecting an enjoyable
adventure to start the new year with a smile on my face.

Sadly it all started to go bad after a few minutes in. All the jokes that matter
are in the trailer, and everybody around me must have seen it too because nobody
was laughing. This not only shows how poor the jokes are, but it strategically
conceals the overall awful acting, to my mind some of the worst ever seen in an
Italian film. Lines mechanically delivered, no rhythm nor traces of passion
whatsoever. As it generally happens with [Italian
dubbing](https://www.filmsinwords.eu/cinephilia/2016/03/17/ondubbing.html),
there are exclamations no one use in real life (*“Chi diavolo sei?”*) and
needless abundance of pronouns (something fine in English, and redundant in
Italian). Are decades of dubbed US films to blame for this? Who knows.

The trailer hides the atrocious action too. There is a sequence, way too long,
with the kids running around visibly not scared of the ridiculous drones
shooting at them. Maybe Soavi told everyone *“run, scream, just do something for
a while”* and then went to grab a bite. No other explanation off the top of my
head.

These are all marginal details compared to a script with no memorable characters
and incapable of building the sense of wonder necessary for an adventure based
on folklore. Paola, the Befana of the title, would fit well in one of the latest
seasons of *Doctor Who*, since she is nothing more than a tool to move the plot
forward. Cortellesi, the only one in the cast with a hint of talent, strolls
along with the aplomb of a tired actress, a genuine *“it’s just a job anyway”*
echo in her voice.

The kids are insufferable, an accretion of stereotype upon stereotype which
probably wished to remind us of the *Goonies* lot but fails miserably at doing
so. They don’t work as a group of friends, there is nothing playful about theme,
because there is no connection between them. They are random people thrown on
the set and left there to the best of their capabilities. I don’t know why Soavi
felt the need to show us the bully as a pervert spying on naked women in all
this, but hey, let’s shock the audience with something wild.

Kind of pointless, though, because the shock comes as soon as the villain enters
the scene. A character so ill-conceived and ill-portrayed it shows a complete
disregard for the history of villains and the viewer’s patience. He tries so
hard to be the bad guy you want to laugh at that he ends up insulting your
intelligence with a dull mockery of the idea of evil. Not for a second
I suspended my disbelief watching him menacing our heroine and planning to
conquer the heart of the children. The supreme failure of *La Befana Vien di
Notte*.

I don’t think I was prepared for a Soavi’s like this. True, I wasn’t expecting
another *Arrivederci Amore, Ciao* either, but a flop such as this hurts more.
