---
layout:     post
title:      The essence of kinesis 
date:       2019-10-23
categories: cinephilia
---

Without going too deep into Aristotle’s *Physics*, the Greek term *kinesis* can
be translated as both change and movement. It’s a fascinating word, because it
implies that every transformation is in fact a motion. It’s also a concept which
popped up in my mind over and over again as I was sitting through Baz
Luhrmann’s *Moulin Rouge!* for the first time.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2019-10-23-kinesis.png">
    <br>
    <em>Moulin Rouge! (Baz Luhrmann, 2001)</em>
</p>

Much like *Romeo + Juliet*, *Moulin Rouge!* starts with a sheer attack on the
viewer’s senses and it took me a while to get accustomed to Luhrmann
machine-gunning frames. The pacing is hysterical with multiple characters
constantly overlapping each other, unable to stop moving and talking, surrounded
by music and colours aimed at obliterating the smallest hint of finesse. The
screen struggles to contain the barrage of action and words, and even the
editing department feels exhausted while it desperately tries to save up energy
for the next sequence of events. It’s impossible to follow all that is happening
in front of us and make sense of it in one go. The film demands other viewings
to be fully appreciated.

This is an approach that can lead the untrained eye to fatigue, because it takes
solid skills to master such an emotional assault to the mind. Play it too loud,
and you will not fit in the viewers’ attention span; instead you will contribute
to its progressive erosion. On the other hand, work on the safe side and you
will miss the potential of your images’ energy, leaving the script or the actors
in charge of avoiding a lacklustre effort.

Luhrmann, however, understands the limits of his *mise-en-scène* and knows
exactly when he is about to stretch it too far. He stops at the right time,
takes a step back, and lets everything in between movements speak. The control
is all the more remarkable considering the places where the events occur. They
are all confined spaces which shorten the distance between people, hastening
their encounters almost as quickly as it would take an editing cut to do the
identical thing. The viewer is unnaturally constrained, but at the same time
they gain a deep level of intimacy with the characters even amidst the restless
chaos.

*Moulin Rouge!* seems to agree with Aristotle about time. According to the great
philosopher, time is a measure of change, hence time itself cannot exist without
it. In *Moulin Rouge!* the illusion and the lavish artifice of the spectacle are
the stopwatches bound to end their run as soon as the characters give up
changing. If they hid their passion, they would never be happy; but if they
unmasked their lies, they would put an end to a show that must go on in spite of
everyone’s fate. Thus their relationship lives both in the dark and in the open,
kept alive by a vibrant tension between the two worlds.

The tension is between Luhrmann’s world and cinema as a spectacle as well. Not
only the director breaks the illusion of a period drama as soon as the pop songs
blend starts, he also plays with the musical form interspersing quotes and
homages along the way, asking us to be permanently up to speed. Moreover, he
wants over-the-top reactions from his leads, who exaggerate their performances
and get close to unnatural acting, albeit never quite there. We are left in
between credulous and incredulous feelings, always on the verge of losing our
mind right before we find faith in the images again.

Almost twenty years later, *Moulin Rouge!* is still an unidentifiable object
from the outer world. Films like *Speed Racer* played with *kinesis* and
cinema’s own artifice to wonderful results, but ever since Luhrmann’s pop
extravaganza nobody has been able to master the essence of *kinesis* with such
lush awkwardness.
