---
layout:     post
title:      A soldier of cinema
date:       2019-04-01
categories: cinephilia
---

I remember quite vividly how I ditched Harmony Korine’s *Spring Breakers* at the
69th Venice International Film Festival. My job was writing a reportage on the
Asian films selection, but that’s a poor excuse for my behaviour, because
I could have easily organised my schedule to catch it. But I didn’t trust the
“enfant terrible” label thrown around whenever the name *Harmony Korine* came
up, and I wasn’t particular interested in Disney starlets. The fuss was too much
for me, and instead of titillating my curiosity, it made me look away.

<!--more-->

Years passed, times a-changed. Last month, I found the blu-ray of *Spring
Breakers* at a cheap price, and I remembered how much I had been learning from
my cinephile mistakes in the last couple of years. I bought it, sure in my
confidence I was now ready for whatever Harmony Korine had planned for me.
I stood corrected.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/media/2019-04-01-spring_breakers.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>Spring Breakers (Harmony Korine, 2012)</em>
</p>

To the best of my knowledge, there are two separate occasions where Harmony
Korine defines himself as a “soldier of cinema”. One is in the *Spring Breakers*
making-of[^1], and the other at the film Q&A in London on April 2013[^2].
It’s an interesting choice of words, because it takes the bravery of a soldier
to never give up one’s own idea of cinema. It also implies a broader battle with
an industry that favours conformism in place of experimentation, a war with a
machine that eats talents and spews standards. Finally, it casts a bold light on
*Spring Breakers* and Korine’s career.

Since his days as a scriptwriter for Larry Clark’s *Kids*, Korine has been
particularly fascinated by characters unable to cope with the world around them.
Outcasts, misfits, marginalized teenagers. His favourite films[^3] are telling
of his background and what he looks for in cinema: the cracks in the society
around him. However, truth doesn’t interest him. He favours a style which relies
heavily on improvisation and gut-feeling, and which indulges in
spur-of-the-moment events instead of linear narrative. He doesn’t shy away from
intimacy, but it’s not for voyeuristic pleasure. Intimacy is linked both with
tenderness and suffering, and he’s at his highest when he strikes the balance
between the two.

This is a balance he had been looking for up until *Spring Breakers*. He leaned
on the suffering side in *Gummo* and *julien donkey-boy*, and he exploited
tenderness maybe a bit too much on *Mister Lonely*. The anarchy of *Trash
Humpers* covers the suffering with mayhem, but the pain is still there albeit in
deviant form. It’s only with *Spring Breakers* that the pieces he had been
collecting for twenty years[^4] finally fit together[^5].

These pieces come from everywhere and relate to anything: exposed and
manipulated beauty reminds me of the bodily provocations of Paul
Verhoeven’s *Showgirls*; Disney stars and specific Britney Spears references
bring back the pop-cynic time-machine of Joseph Kahn’s *Detention*; drug abuse
comes from the social punches of Alan Clarke’s filmography; bigger-than-you
lives on the edge embrace the abstract hedonism of Francis Ford
Coppola’s *Rumble Fish*; the relation between Alien and the girls summons the
dangerously vibrant affair of Bernardo Bertolucci’s *La Luna*; and the much
desired escapade is just like the impossible dream of Robert Altman’s *Brewster
McCloud*. With compassionate love, Korine clashes his influences altogether,
mashes them up, and finds the peculiarity of his voice.

Nonetheless, Korine doesn’t stop at savvy nods and nerdy winks. Actually, he is
not interested in pushing quotations down the viewer’s throat, because, by his
own admission, he is not a video brat[^6]. The difference between Harmony Korine
and Quentin Tarantino, or between Harmony Korine and Kevin Smith, is that the
cultural context plays both a relevant and an irrelevant part. In 2012,
everything from popular culture that inhabits *Spring Breakers* was fashionably
around us. Korine picked the trend-setters of the time and had fun with them. He
did not, however, insert the film into a precise time-capsule. For instance,
*Clerks* cannot be looked at without thinking of the 90s. In this respect,
Korine reaches out for the timelessness of Michael Mann or Terrence Malick. He
is in the present just as much as he is in the future. Watch *Spring Breakers*
now for the first time and you may loose the relevance of the celebrity
discourse, but you sure won’t miss the degeneration of disillusioned youth.

Part of what makes Harmony Korine one of the most relevant American directors
today is his unwillingness to compromise. He seems determined to pursue his
fantasies without receding once, facing both praises and critiques with eyes
that are already thinking about the next step. Or maybe not. Maybe he is just
enjoying the ride and not really thinking about it at all.

<hr>

[^1]: Not the one on the blu-ray, but the one on the DVD contained in the 2 disc
    special edition.

[^2]: See: [SPRING BREAKERS - Q&A with Director Harmony Korine](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bJQoi4lR3wc)

[^3]: See: [Harmony Korine's Favourite Films (according to hearsay)](https://letterboxd.com/gmosalad/list/harmony-korines-favorite-films-according/)

[^4]: *Kids* was released on 1995, but Korine wrote the script in 1993. See:
    [Kids (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kids_(film))

[^5]: I haven’t seen *The Beach Bum* yet.

[^6]: See: [Interview with Harmony Korine](https://www.rogerebert.com/interviews/interview-with-harmony-korine)
