---
layout:     post
title:      Breaking the balance
date:       2019-06-16
categories: cinephilia
---

M. Night Shyamalan is a peculiar subject in contemporary cinema. He helms his
films most of the times, controlling writing, direction, and production, while
often relying on the help of recurring collaborators. He devised his own
recognizable style, and he has been showing interests in different genres with
developing fascination for the psychological and the spiritual.

<!--more-->

Interestingly, Shyamalan’s career is one of highs and lows. The box office has
usually proved the director right on his path, but popular criticism seems to
think otherwise[^1]. Most of his efforts, especially the ones where he tries to
approach new material (e.g., *The Happening* and *After Earth*), have been panned by
critics[^2].

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2019-06-16-glass.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>Glass (M. Night Shyamalan, 2019)</em>
</p>

*Glass* is the third chapter of Shyamalan’s *Unbreakable* trilogy, and arguably
the most complex in terms of narrative, style, and themes explored. It’s here
that Shyamalan unravels the ties between David Dunn, Kevin Wendell Crumb, and
Elijah Price, but *Glass* is not content in offering a quick solution to the
enigma that started twenty years ago. On the contrary, Shyamalan uses the
platform of his own creation to subvert the superheroes cinematic universe. It
does so not by pointing out the failures of other films, but by showing the way
to an alternative kind of writing and directing.

One has to look no further than the beginning to appreciate Shyamalan’s effort
to find something new. The Overseer (Dunn) and The Beast (Crumb), the hero of
*Unbreakable* and the villain of *Split* respectively, meet and fight each other
without the time to process the fact that Shyamalan is deliberately avoiding the
setup for an epic, final battle between good and evil. And if this isn’t enough,
he ends the fight abruptly and shuts his heroes in a mental institution for the
rest of *Glass*, opting for a slow investigation of their psyche instead of
abandoning them to a relentless action feast.

*Glass* is roughly divided into three acts. The first ends with the
aforementioned capturing of Dunn and Crumb, the second ends with Mr. Glass
ingeniously setting himself, Crumb, and Dunn free, and the third is the final
confrontation.

The first act seems to be only a prologue, and apparently it doesn’t offer the
psychological nuances of the second one and the twists of the third, but
it’s not so simple. Joseph Dunn, David’s son, has become a grown-up and yet he
is still profoundly attached to his father, one co-dependent on the other. The
death of Audrey Dunn removed the figure of the mother and the wife from the
family, and despite being only hinted at the consequences on the relationship
between David and Joseph cannot be underestimated. The bond is stronger because
they only have each other to rely upon, but it also lacks the feminine
rationality that could help ground imagination and dreams of virile justice.
Then we have Casey Cooke, the only survivor of the collective sacrifice Kevin
Crumb and his personalities were devising for The Beast in *Split*. The trauma
of abuse in her private life reflects the history of abuses that has altered
Crumb’s mind, and the powerful linkage between the two that ended up saving
Cooke before turns out to be unbreakable in spite of the horror she has
witnessed. As in the case of Audrey’s death, Shyamalan only hints at Cooke’s
attachment to Crumb, but again it will prove pivotal.

*Glass* engages the viewer in a long, overtly critical, deconstruction of myth
and belief. Albeit a subterfuge for a bigger plan, the second act is a constant
push to hold one’s true nature back. Psychiatry is used as a means to suppress
inner abilities, because the possibility of something so out of the ordinary is
inconceivable as an extraordinary truth. By subjugating her patients Dr. Ellie
Staple is exercising control over unnatural forces, hence playing the role of
God that science frequently allows humans to enact. Shyamalan turns this
critical observation against us, making both the doctor and the protagonists
look at the camera in medium and medium close-up shots. The point of view keeps
shifting between observers and observed, analyst and patient, hunter and prey,
complicating relations and sympathies by juxtaposing good and evil without clear
distinctions. This circularity is mirrored in the acts of coercion we see:
superheroes are forced to be humans, humans are pressured to be superheroes,
victims are manipulated to confuse other victims. The freedom of choice is mined
by reasonable doubt until the urge to control reveals itself as the supreme
power in the third act.

The third act is where all the pieces come together. It’s a showdown, but as
deceitful as anything the trilogy has showed us so far. We understand what Mr.
Glass had in mind, but more importantly we realise that heroes and villains are
one and the same. Shyamalan reflects on the privacy deprivation of our
technology-aided age and on the abilities in terms of communication it grants.
Eventually, technology proves to be both fatal and a chance of hope, a man-made
super power capable of multiplying the eyes of the oppressor and the mouths of
the rebels at the same time. It’s the tool which makes connectivity possible,
and through connection we can find each other and, consequently, ourselves.

#### Notes ####

[^1]: See the critical reception as reported [on
    Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M._Night_Shyamalan#Critical_reception).

[^2]: See the comments on my review on [Letterboxd](https://letterboxd.com/muberti/film/after-earth/).
