---
layout:     post
title:      An open connection
date:       2019-12-19
categories: cinephilia
---

Listing my favourite films of this closing decade would be a daunting task,
because I have only recently started to log my viewings. What I can do, though,
is picking one of them, the one which stands out not as the most revolutionary
of the lot, but as the best example of what film-making is all about for me. And
that would be Todd Haynes’ *Carol*.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2019-12-19-carol.png">
    <br>
    <em>Carol (Todd Haynes, 2015)</em>
</p>

*Carol* is deceptively simpler than other relevant candidates to my number one
spot on the best of the 2010s list. It is not a culmination of stylistic
explorations like Michael Mann’s *Blackhat* or Jia Zhangke’s *Mountains May
Depart*. It is not a new way of narrating the social disaster we live in like
Harmony Korine’s *Spring Breakers*, nor another push to the cinematic form like
Jean-Luc Godard’s *Film Socialisme*. The closest work I can think of is Baz
Luhrmann’s *The Great Gatsby*, because both films understand the pages of the
books they come from without compromising what cinema means to their respective
auteurs.

*Carol* begins with a man interrupting a conversation between two women, Carol
Aird and Therese Belivet. The women are sitting at a table, apparently having a
casual conversation. By the end of the film we will have understood the weight
of this exchange, but for now we can only register the effect of the man
forcibly imposing his presence. Carol is visibly annoyed, she is trying to keep
her coolness before leaving the table and the scene, but only later we will know
the turmoil behind the façade. Therese is embarrassed, in her eyes the
reflection of the fight within her because she realizes, and it will happen
again, that she has no control over the situation. This is just the first of
many instances where women intimate space is invaded by men. Repeatedly over the
course of Carol and Therese story, they face male gaze and male ire, men trying
to make them reason according to male logic. With the exception of Harge Aird,
Haynes does not show us how low men can get when they fail to take a
relationship between two women into consideration. The male characters cannot
accept a thing such as two women in love, and Haynes makes no effort to give us
a man able to think otherwise. Considering some of the comments I hear in my
everyday life on gender-related topics, Haynes has all the reasons to be
cynical.

However, this is a cynicism that does not need to be shout at the viewer. Most
of *Carol* takes place between silent reactions. Therese acknowledges the world
around her with feeble tilts of her head, slight changes on her face, hardly
using words to express what she is feeling. Her personality seems contained in
her gestures. Haynes does not seem interested in a silent film performance,
though. He is simply trying to make sense of a world where love has to be feared
and needs to be hidden away. It’s a world of little words spoken freely. Even
Carol, with her strong personality and her commanding wisdom, does not really
know what to say to Therese much of the time if not through her body. Maybe she
is afraid to lose her, but she also knows the consequences of her desire. The
two women do not perceive their relationship as something inherently wrong,
because there is nothing wrong with love, but at the same time everyone blames
them for what they are doing. Love is there from the beginning, but Therese
battles to accept it, because the conventions of imposed masculinity are always
in her way. Carol and Therese want, but they cannot. They only can if they
abandon everything and live among themselves.

*Carols* explores the discovery of love and the progress of the relationship
through senses. The viewer feels the surfaces as if touching them, not because
the sound design is great, which it is by the way, but because the grace of the
characters’ movements is matched by the delicacy of the camera capturing them.
The gentleness of a photograph, the softness of a sweater, the coldness of a
gun: objects are alive without getting in the way. And yet Haynes avoids the
objectification of commodities. In spite of the evident comfort in Carol’s life
and the modest state of Therese’s one, *Carol* offers few glimpses of this
difference, because it is irrelevant when it comes to what the women’s hearts
crave for. When on the road, their love deepens unhindered by how cheap or
expensive the room they are in at any particular moment. As long as men are not
around, the issue is not where or how. 

Sight is another important and richly covered sense. *Carol* lives thanks to
eyes and looks. The first lunch Carol and Therese have together is all about how
they perceive each other and how this perception informs them. There is already
passion underneath those looks, but it’s more of a systematic and yet gentle
search for a possible kindred spirit. Is it there? Am I reaching out for
something real? Carol’s and Therese’s eyes tentatively inspects what is in front
of them, telling more about the affection they are trying to conceal than the
mind would want to reveal. On the other hand, men looks down on women as if to
constantly remind them of their social position. Men’s eyes are angry and
disparaging, but they are at their worst when they become condescending,
manipulating solidarity to remind the women who is in charge after all.

In posing love as the central node of a web of questions and answers, *Carol*
refuses to make sense of the connection it creates between two people and
prefers to live it open. And rightly so. Love is the reason we unreasonably fall
for someone, and it’s not often that a film captures so well the poor chances we
have to explain what is happening to us. The more I look at *Carol*, the more it
seems like the peak of Todd Haynes’ career, something he is going to come to
terms with for the rest of his life.
