---
layout:     post
title:      Reducing a book and enlarging TV
date:       2019-05-28
categories: cinephilia
---

No film has ever had a more traumatizing impact on me than *The Texas Chain Saw
Massacre*. I remember fondly the day I found a lousy Italian DVD, because it
felt like a smart and lucky move. Two cents for the forbidden fruit. The 14" CRT
television in my bedroom could not contain the power coming from that rotten and
perverse images.

<!--more-->

That’s why I’ve stayed away from Tobe Hooper for such a long time and have
hardly registered his death in 2017. Then I stumbled upon occasional praises for
*The Texas Chain Saw Massacre* on Letterboxd, which took me back to that
infamous day. A sign, I thought. I bought the fortieth anniversary restoration
Blu-ray and let Hooper take care of my nightmares once again. The film’s power
is still intact, but this time I was able to appreciate it for the incredible
work that it is. Furthermore, it urged me to explore Hooper’s career.

Of his many efforts, I want to single out the mini-series *Salem’s Lot* as the
centre of this writing. It ranks among the best Hooper had to offer and it
develops themes and stylistic choices that either would come up later in his
films or represent variations on the director’s regular obsessions.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2019-05-28-salems_lot.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>Salem’s Lot (Tobe Hooper, 1979)</em>
</p>

*Salem’s Lot* is Hooper’s first attempt at finding his place in a
made-for-television production, and it remains the best example of his struggle
to find a good compromise between his vision and the limits of the medium. The
script was handed to him, adapted from Stephen King’s book by Paul Monash, who
had already worked on De Palma’s *Carrie*, and heavily modified by producer
Richard Kobritz, who wanted Hooper behind the camera after a screening of *The
Texas Chain Saw Massacre*. Kobritz also had his hands on the casting, the
special effects, and the score, building boundaries for Hooper along the way to
the final cut[^1]. However, it’s precisely in this enclosed environment that
watching Hooper operate becomes fascinating, especially considering how inferior
his subsequent encounters with television have been and the troublesome relation
with the producers on *Eaten Alive* two years before. He had only his
craftsmanship and his understanding of King’s novel to work with.

The book takes its time to get the reader acquainted with ’Salem’s Lot and its
inhabitants. There is a constant friction between who everyone appears to be and
what really happens in their life. This layer of secrecy is carefully attacked
by the most beloved hobby practised anywhere in the world: gossip. Gossip spares
nobody, and King devotes pages to let us know the poor privacy anyone can get in
his imaginary town. *Salem’s Lot*’s script overlooks this subject, but Hooper
does not. In place of the omniscient narrator and the chats over the telephone
of the novel, Hooper uses his camera as a curious eye, an eye which misses
nothing and oversees everybody and everything. It’s as if we are entering
uninvited the townspeople’s lives, witnessing adultery, alcoholism, school play
rehearsals, dinners with guests, and new-born romances.

Monash and Kobritz conflate different characters into few individuals, reducing
complexities to accommodate the 3-hour duration. This functions on a narrative
level only insofar as we do not expect characters such as Mike Ryerson and Ned
Tibbets[^2] to be something other than victims. They get little screen time, and
there is no room for Hooper to develop them. The Norton family loses much of its
appeal too, leaving us with bits of Ann Norton’s conservatism. The script rushes
to introduce the vampires, and it’s up to Hooper to ensure the mystery
surrounding Richard Straker and Kurt Barlow is a primary concern for everyone in
’Salem’s Lot. Hooper resorts to an eerie awkwardness that levitates between two
characters as they talk of seemingly simple matters. He used this device before,
and here he obviously could not push it to the extremes of his two previous
works, but it’s enough to make some conversations memorably weird (e.g., the
exchanges between Richard Straker and Constable Parkins Gillespie).

The most striking difference between the mini-series and the book can be seen in
the complete transformation of the main villains. Except for the violent killing
of Bill Norton, the powerfully menacing Richard Straker becomes a witty old man
rarely scaring as he should be. Hooper plays with the black of his clothes and
the shadows of the night to remind us of who Straker really is. Straker works in
spite of the script, and it’s only because of Hooper. Kurt Barlow, on the other
hand, undergoes a great turn. He becomes a silent, overreaching entity, the
incarnation of evil as the greater unknown.

Even if it takes more than a viewing to appreciate the subtle, personal touch of
Hooper in *Salem’s Lot*, the design and pretty much all the scenes in the
Marsten House uncover him leaving no traces of doubt. From the floors and the
skeletons of dead animals to the camera movements when Susan Norton and Mark
Petrie enter the building, the Marsten House is lifted from King’s pages and
reinvented through the imagination of a director who would always be interested
in ambiguous spaces.

One can only wonder what *Salem’s Lot* could be were Hooper given the chance to
run amok. Nonetheless, it remains a fine example of a work imposed on a director
whose resourcefulness could barely be contained by a non-strictly art-related
mind.

<hr>

[^1]: Richard Kobritz is the first name to appear as the ending credits start.

[^2]: Floyd Tibbets and Matt Burke are strangely renamed for the mini-series.
