---
layout:     post
title:      Burn, baby, burn
date:       2020-02-24
categories: cinephilia
---

I am always conflicted when it comes to Japanese animation. Talents such as
Hideaki Anno and Satoshi Kon are absolute masters to me, but I’ve never really
gone beyond the most popular names. My knowledge is limited because I want it to
be limited. It sounds like a silly paradox, but it’s true. As much as I love
works like *Neon Genesis Evangelion* and *Paprika*, I stop at the entrance and
somehow refuse to understand the immense universe that Japanese animation is.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2020-02-24-promare.jpg">
    <br>
    <em>Promare (Hiroyuki Imaishi, 2019)</em>
</p>

Sometimes, though, a new name manages to break through my nonsensical walls. In
2010 I met Hiroyuki Imaishi’s *Dead Leaves* and immediately fell in love with
it. Its fifty minutes of pumping music and characters screaming their way
through deranged mayhem are the complete opposite of what *Neon Genesis
Evangelion* so special, and maybe just for this reason alone, what makes
Imaishi’s madness so irresistible.

Needless to say, since I heard the first words about *Promare* expectations have
been mounting up, despite the fact that everything Imaishi did in between *Dead
Leaves* and *Promare* is of moderate interest to me. His worlds live through
action and movement, and when he stops and lets something else on the front his
power on me decreases (e.g., *Gurren Lagann*). Even when he sustains the fury of
*Dead Leaves*, as it often happens in the series *Panty & Stocking with
Garterbelt*, he is actually stretching a technique that gains much of its
strength from the short timespan it was deployed in.

*Promare* starts with a quick, precise prologue before almost twenty minutes of
Imaishi showing how much he has learned throughout the years. The relentless
action explodes with details and pastel colours, testing the
viewer’s willingness to keep up with chaos. One can see where Imaishi is coming
from, because he seems to sum up his career, but at the same time he is
introducing a renovated style. He builds a world out of polygons and angles,
which eventually will prove to be animation tools as much as elemental parts of
a universe plagued by their rigidity. Their precision comes at a cost, but
it’s not until the very end that we learn what is at stake here. Amidst the
bedlam, characterization begins to take place, and the specific traits of each
character emerge through movements and reactions to events impossible to
control.

Along with the protagonists, a plethora of themes rise up to the surface.
Although Imaishi doesn’t seem to be interested in exploring them in depth,
*Promare* hints at least at fascism, racism, human experimentation, and
technocratic failures. It’s not easy to understand the social and political
implications of the issues on display, because the film deliberately chooses
chaos before words, but *Promare*’s world still boils with details. There is
also room for irony and sarcasm. Imaishi points his fun gun against Japanese pop
culture, in a mix of self-referential pose and funny remarks, like Galo Thymos’
insisting on announcing himself before moving to action or applying awkward
labels to machinery and fight stances. However, the dark cynicism of *Dead
Leaves* and its twisted taste for the obscene are long gone, probably a sign of
the kind of public Imaishi is aiming for this time.

The epic scale of the action sequences makes up for what *Promare* lacks in sex
and degradation. Furious flames in the form of a dragon blast through the city
in a feast of lights, while gigantic robots wreck havoc among skyscrapers,
picking up where *Gurren Lagann* stopped. Imaishi pushes the boundaries of his
animated sense of wonder, intersecting different animation techniques to render
new possibilities on the screen. Imagination runs wild in every minute of
*Promare*, which is what I expect animation to always do anyway. Imaishi knows
there is no point in limiting oneself where the means at one’s disposal allow
everything the mind conceives. The sky is not the limit. The sky is way below us
now.
