---
layout:     post
title:      Comrades, it’s a love story
date:       2020-03-26
categories: cinephilia
---

I feel old and boring whenever I talk or write about Hong Kong cinema, which is
weird because I wasn’t there at the beginning. I was too young back when Italian
film nerds were exchanging obscure VHS tapes feeling like underground warriors.
My eyes were still set on Hollywood and little else from Europe, so it wasn’t
until a decent internet connection arrived that the gates finally opened.

<!--more-->

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/2020-03-26-comrades.png">
    <br>
    <em>Comrades: Almost a Love Story (Peter Chan, 1996)</em>
</p>

When the time came, I experienced my own kind of magic. Armed with a cheap
region-free DVD player I ransacked [yesasia.com](https://www.yesasia.com/global/en/home.html) and other, now defunct online
stores, driven by insatiable euphoria. I just couldn’t stop. The more I read,
the more I wanted to watch. The more I watched, the more I collected piles of
DVDs. A flow of images, titles, directors became one indistinct mass of data,
impossible to keep up with. Honest pleasure was much more important than the
analytical approach.

Those wild years of endless viewings seem a bit distant now that Hong Kong
cinema has definitely distanced itself from what it was. On the one hand, today
we have lavish productions, bombastic blockbusters good for a popcorn and Coke
combo. On the other hand, some directors and actors from the golden age are
pushing the nostalgia effect to its extreme consequences, struggling to keep the
old spirit alive, revisiting tropes that made them heroes amongst cinephiles all
over the world. Either way, something precious got lost along the way, as if
Hong Kong hasn’t really been able to cope with the handover yet.

There is a moment in Peter Chan’s *Comrades: Almost a Love Story* which captures
this sense of loss and bewilderment so well. We are near the end, Lai Siu Kwan
(Leon Lai) and Lee Kiu (Maggie Cheung) are in New York, a city whose crowded and
chaotic streets resemble those they left back in Hong Kong. Lee Kiu is working
as a tourist guide now, taking a group of Chinese mainlanders around the Big
Apple. Tired of taking pictures at the Statue of Liberty, a couple of women turn
to Lee Kiu, trying to understand when she is taking them to shopping. One of the
them asks about her home town, Guangzhou, and more importantly, points out the
mere fact that many Hongkongers are moving to China these days where they are
finding better jobs. Confronting these remarks with what has meant for Lee Kiu
and Lai Siu Kwan to leave mainland China and try to get by in Hong Kong is
devastating. Why leave China for another place if that is really where the
opportunities are up for grab? How can they stand the pace of a country growing
at a speed which is inevitably leaving many behind?

Chan seems to believe that Hong Kong has never been the land of opportunities
for mainlanders with little hope to survive where they were born, and extends
his disillusion to New York by blending the differences between the two cities.
Eventually, all that Lee Kiu and Lai Siu Kwan are working for is to remain in
the same place after all. As immigrants in the United States as they were in
Hong Kong, they are looked down and confined to the isolation of the unknowns,
rejected by societies where solipsism has become the only means of survival.
Alone with their dreams of escape, Lee Kiu and Lai Siu Kawn have only their work
to hang on to.

Right before the dramatic handover, Chan used romance to spell out the problems
of a city that has failed to deal with contemporaneity. The capitalism which
separated Hong Kong from China’s own brand of the same economic system, and
which ironically made most of its vibrant cinema possible, wrapped the city
obfuscating the reality outside, making it oblivious and totally unprepared to
what was about to come next. *Comrades: Almost a Love Story* suggests that as long
as Lee Kiu and Lai Siu Kwan have each other, there is a way out. But what
happens when love is missing? Like Lee Kiu facing the inquiring tourist, Chan
doesn’t offer an answer. And as for Hong Kong cinema, the question still remains
open.
